Biology is the science that studies living organisms and how they interact with one another and their environment.
Science employs both deductive reasoning and inductive reasoning.
Scientists construct hypotheses from systematically collected objective data.
They then perform experiments designed to disprove the hypotheses.
On a round-the-world voyage Darwin made observations that eventually led him to formulate the hypothesis of evolution by natural selection.
The fossil and geographic patterns of life he observed convinced Darwin that a process of evolution had occurred.
The Malthus idea that populations cannot grow unchecked led Darwin, and another naturalist named Wallace, to propose the hypothesis of natural selection.
In the century since Darwin, a mass of experimental evidence has supported his theory of evolution, now accepted by practically all practicing biologists.
In its broadest sense, biology is the study of living things—the science of life.
Living things come in an astounding variety of shapes and forms, and biologists study life in many different ways.
They live with gorillas, collect fossils, and listen to whales.
They isolate viruses, grow mushrooms, and examine the structure of fruit flies.
They read the messages encoded in the long molecules of heredity and count how many times a hummingbird’s wings beat each second.
What makes something “alive”? Anyone could deduce that a galloping horse is alive and a car is not, but why? We cannot say, “If it moves, it’s alive,” because a car can move, and gelatin can wiggle in a bowl.
They certainly are not alive.
What characteristics do define life? All living organisms share five basic characteristics.
All organisms consist of one or more cells with highly ordered structures: atoms make up molecules, which construct cellular organelles, which are contained within cells.
This hierarchical organization continues at higher levels in multicellular organisms and among organisms.
All organisms respond to stimuli.
Plants grow toward a source of light, and your pupils dilate when you walk into a dark room.
All organisms are capable of growing and reproducing, and they all possess hereditary molecules that are passed to their offspring, ensuring that the offspring are of the
same species.
Although crystals also “grow,” their growth does not involve hereditary molecules. All organisms have regulatory mechanisms that coordinate the organism’s internal functions. These functions include supplying cells with nutrients, transporting substances through the organism,
and many others.
All organisms maintain relatively constant internal conditions, different from their environment, a process called homeostasis.
All living things share certain key characteristics: order, sensitivity, growth, development and reproduction, regulation, and homeostasis.
