Suppose that truth is a woman – and why not? Aren’t there reasons for suspecting that all philosophers, to the extent that they have been dogmatists, have not really understood women? That the grotesque seriousness
of their approach towards the truth and the clumsy advances they have made so far are unsuitable ways of pressing their suit with a woman? What is certain is that she has spurned them – leaving dogmatism of all types
standing sad and discouraged. If it is even left standing! Because there are
those who make fun of dogmatism, claiming that it has fallen over, that
it is lying flat on its face, or more, that dogmatism is in its last gasps. But
seriously, there are good reasons for hoping that all dogmatizing in philosophy was just noble (though childish) ambling and preambling, however
solemn, settled and decisive it might have seemed. And perhaps the time
is very near when we will realize again and again just what actually served
as the cornerstone of those sublime and unconditional philosophical
edifices that the dogmatists used to build – some piece of folk superstition from time immemorial (like the soul-superstition that still causes
trouble as the superstition of the subject or I), some word-play perhaps, a
seduction of grammar or an over-eager generalization from facts that are
really very local, very personal, very human-all-too-human. Let us hope
that the dogmatists’ philosophy was only a promise over the millennia, as
was the case even earlier with astrology, in whose service perhaps more labor, money, ingenuity, and patience was expended than for any real science
so far. We owe the great style of architecture in Asia and Egypt to astrology and its “supernatural” claims. It seems that all great things, in order
to inscribe eternal demands in the heart of humanity, must first wander
the earth under monstrous and terrifying masks; dogmatic philosophy
was this sort of a mask: the Vedanta doctrine in Asia, for example, or
Platonism in Europe. We should not be ungrateful towards dogmatism,
but it must nonetheless be said that the worst, most prolonged, and most
dangerous of all errors to this day was a dogmatist’s error, namely Plato’s
invention of pure spirit and the Good in itself. But now that it has been
overcome, and Europe breathes a sigh of relief after this nightmare, and
at least can enjoy a healthier – well – sleep, we, whose task is wakefulness
itself, are the heirs to all the force cultivated through the struggle against
this error. Of course: talking about spirit and the Good like Plato did
meant standing truth on its head and disowning even perspectivism, which
is the fundamental condition of all life. In fact, as physicians we could ask:
“How could such a disease infect Plato, the most beautiful outgrowth of
antiquity? Did the evil Socrates corrupt him after all? was Socrates in fact
the corrupter of youth? did he deserve his hemlock?” – But the struggle
against Plato, or, to use a clear and “popular” idiom, the struggle against
the Christian-ecclesiastical pressure of millennia – since Christianity is
Platonism for the “people” – has created a magnificent tension of spirit
in Europe, the likes of which the earth has never known: with such a
tension in our bow we can now shoot at the furthest goals. Granted, the
European experiences this tension as a crisis or state of need; and twice
already there have been attempts, in a grand fashion, to unbend the bow,
once through Jesuitism, and the second time through the democratic
Enlightenment: – which, with the help of freedom of the press and circulation of newspapers, might really insure that spirit does not experience
itself so readily as “need”! (Germans invented gunpowder – all honors
due! But they made up for it – they invented the press.) But we, who
are neither Jesuits nor democrats, nor even German enough, we good
Europeans and free, very free spirits – we still have it, the whole need of
spirit and the whole tension of its bow! And perhaps the arrow too, the
task, and – who knows? the goal ...
The will to truth that still seduces us into taking so many risks, this famous
truthfulness that all philosophers so far have talked about with veneration:
what questions this will to truth has already laid before us! What strange,
terrible, questionable questions! That is already a long story – and yet
it seems to have hardly begun? Is it any wonder if we finally become
suspicious, lose patience, turn impatiently away? That we ourselves are
also learning from this Sphinx to pose questions? Who is it really that
questions us here? What in us really wills the truth? In fact, we paused
for a long time before the question of the cause of this will – until we
finally came to a complete standstill in front of an even more fundamental
question. We asked about the value of this will. Granted, we will truth:
why not untruth instead? And uncertainty? Even ignorance? The problem
of the value of truth came before us, – or was it we who came before the
problem? Which of us is Oedipus? Which one is the Sphinx? It seems
we have a rendezvous of questions and question-marks. – And, believe it
or not, it ultimately looks to us as if the problem has never been raised
until now, – as if we were the first to ever see it, fix our gaze on it, risk it.
Because this involves risk and perhaps no risk has ever been greater.
“How could anything originate out of its opposite? Truth from error, for
instance? Or the will to truth from the will to deception? Or selfless action from self-interest? Or the pure, sun-bright gaze of wisdom from a
covetous leer? Such origins are impossible, and people who dream about
such things are fools – at best. Things of the highest value must have
another, separate origin of their own, – they cannot be derived from this
ephemeral, seductive, deceptive, lowly world, from this mad chaos of confusion and desire. Look instead to the lap of being, the everlasting, the
hidden God, the ‘thing-in-itself ’ – this is where their ground must be, and
nowhere else!” – This way of judging typifies the prejudices by which
metaphysicians of all ages can be recognized: this type of valuation lies behind all their logical procedures. From these “beliefs” they try to acquire
their “knowledge,” to acquire something that will end up being solemnly
christened as “the truth.” The fundamental belief of metaphysicians is
the belief in oppositions of values. It has not occurred to even the most
cautious of them to start doubting right here at the threshold, where it is
actually needed the most – even though they had vowed to themselves “de
omnibus dubitandum.” But we can doubt, first, whether opposites even
exist and, second, whether the popular valuations and value oppositions
that have earned the metaphysicians’ seal of approval might not only be
foreground appraisals. Perhaps they are merely provisional perspectives,
perhaps they are not even viewed head-on; perhaps they are even viewed
from below, like a frog-perspective, to borrow an expression that painters
will recognize. Whatever value might be attributed to truth, truthfulness,
and selflessness, it could be possible that appearance, the will to deception,
and craven self-interest should be accorded a higher and more fundamental value for all life. It could even be possible that whatever gives value
to those good and honorable things has an incriminating link, bond, or
tie to the very things that look like their evil opposites; perhaps they are
even essentially the same. Perhaps! – But who is willing to take charge
of such a dangerous Perhaps! For this we must await the arrival of a new
breed of philosophers, ones whose taste and inclination are somehow the
reverse of those we have seen so far – philosophers of the dangerous Perhaps in every sense. – And in all seriousness: I see these new philosophers
approaching.
I have kept a close eye on the philosophers and read between their lines
for long enough to say to myself: the greatest part of conscious thought
must still be attributed to instinctive activity, and this is even the case for
philosophical thought. This issue needs re-examination in the same way
that heredity and “innate characteristics” have been re-examined. Just
as the act of birth makes no difference to the overall course of heredity,
neither is “consciousness” opposed to instinct in any decisive sense – most
of a philosopher’s conscious thought is secretly directed and forced into
determinate channels by the instincts. Even behind all logic and its autocratic posturings stand valuations or, stated more clearly, physiological
requirements for the preservation of a particular type of life. For example,
that the determinate is worth more than the indeterminate, appearance
worth less than the “truth”: despite all their regulative importance for
us, these sorts of appraisals could still be just foreground appraisals, a
particular type of niaiserie, precisely what is needed for the preservation of beings like us. But this assumes that it is not man who is the “measure of things” ...
We do not consider the falsity of a judgment as itself an objection to a judgment; this is perhaps where our new language will sound most foreign. The
question is how far the judgment promotes and preserves life, how well it
preserves, and perhaps even cultivates, the type. And we are fundamentally inclined to claim that the falsest judgments (which include synthetic
judgments a priori) are the most indispensable to us, and that without accepting the fictions of logic, without measuring reality against the wholly
invented world of the unconditioned and self-identical, without a constant
falsification of the world through numbers, people could not live – that a
renunciation of false judgments would be a renunciation of life, a negation
of life. To acknowledge untruth as a condition of life: this clearly means
resisting the usual value feelings in a dangerous manner; and a philosophy that risks such a thing would by that gesture alone place itself beyond
good and evil.
What goads us into regarding all philosophers with an equal measure of
mistrust and mockery is not that we are struck repeatedly by how innocent
they are – how often and easily they err and stray, in short, their childish
childlikeness – but rather that there is not enough genuine honesty about
them: even though they all make a huge, virtuous racket as soon as the
problem of truthfulness is even remotely touched upon. They all act as if
they had discovered and arrived at their genuine convictions through the
self-development of a cold, pure, divinely insouciant dialectic (in contrast
to the mystics of every rank, who are more honest than the philosophers
and also sillier – they talk about “inspiration” –): while what essentially
happens is that they take a conjecture, a whim, an “inspiration” or, more
typically, they take some fervent wish that they have sifted through and
made properly abstract – and they defend it with rationalizations after
the fact. They are all advocates who do not want to be seen as such; for
the most part, in fact, they are sly spokesmen for prejudices that they
christen as “truths” – and very far indeed from the courage of conscience
that confesses to this fact, this very fact; and very far from having the good
taste of courage that also lets this be known, perhaps to warn a friend or
foe, or out of a high-spirited attempt at self-satire. The stiff yet demure
tartuffery used by the old Kant to lure us along the clandestine, dialectical
path that leads the way (or rather: astray) to his “categorical imperative” –
this spectacle provides no small amusement for discriminating spectators
like us, who keep a close eye on the cunning tricks of the old moralists and
preachers of morals. Or even that hocus pocus of a mathematical form
used by Spinoza to arm and outfit his philosophy (a term which, when all
is said and done, really means “his love of wisdom”) and thus, from the
very start, to strike terror into the heart of the attacker who would dare to
cast a glance at the unconquerable maiden and Pallas Athena: – how much
personal timidity and vulnerability this sick hermit’s masquerade reveals!
