Molloy is a failed story in the sense that it never delivers a definitive narrative.
This is not to say the characters don’t tell a story–they do, and they do so with short declarative sentences that imply an authoritative finality to the narrative.
Yet, this decisiveness is exactly where the impossibility of telling a story is generated, as the narrators maintain their decisive delivery even when they second guess their narrative abilities.
Consider Molloy’s memory: Then how…could I know they were paying no attention to me? I don’t know. I knew it and I did it, that’s all I know. But suddenly a woman rose up before me, a big fat woman dressed in black, or rather in mauve. (Molloy 30)
Statements of certainty and doubt are told with equal firmness, making it impossible to determine whether the initial statement or revision has final authority over the narrative.
The result is an inability to determine a shade of pink from the color black because they are functionally identical. Rather than underscore the honesty of the speaker, as is the typical effect of epanorthosis, the frequent retraction and amendment of statements implies untrustworthiness and produces doubt in the narrator’s ability to express anything at all.
In a formalization of how epanorthosis produces ambiguity, Beckett also inserts mathematical combinatorials within his writing. Molloy’s meditation on his injuries presents a good instance of this:
For I no longer had one bad leg plus another more or less good, but now both were equally bad.
And the worse, to my mind, was that which till now had been good, at least comparatively good, and whose change for the worse I had not yet got used to.
So in a way, if you like, I still had one bad leg and one good, or rather less bad, with this difference however, that was the less bad now was the less good of heretofore.
It was therefore on the old bad leg that I often longed to lean… (104).
The passage makes manifest every possible combination of how Molloy could describe his legs, and then it concludes by forgetting about the exercise entirely and moving forward with the narrative.
The combinatorial is completed simply for its own sake, simply so that the story can come one step closer to impossibility by covering every permutation of the possible in a given scenario.
This mathematical exercise occurs several times throughout Molloy, and each time the process of arriving at impossibility becomes a machine for generating text.
As a result, the combinatorial satisfies Beckett’s necessity to express despite the certainty of failure and indigence.
