THIS BOOK CENTERS IN WHAT WE CALL A propaganda model, an analytical framework that attempts to explain the performance of the U.S. media in terms of the basic institutional structures and
relationships within which they operate. It is our view that, among their
other functions, the media serve, and propagandize on behalf of, the
powerful societal interests that control and finance them. The representatives of these interests have important agendas and principles that they
want to advance, and they are well positioned to shape and constrain
media policy. This is normally not accomplished by crude intervention,
but by the selection of right-thinking personnel and by the editors' and
working journalists' internalization of priorities and definitions of newsworthiness that conform to the institution's policy.
Structural factors are those such as ownership and control, dependence on other major funding sources (notably, advertisers), and mutual
interests and relationships between the media and those who make the
news and have the power to define it and explain what it means. The
propaganda model also incorporates other closely related factors such
as the ability to complain about the media's treatment of news (that is,
produce "flak"), to provide "experts" to confirm the official slant on the
news, and to fix the basic principles and ideologies that are taken for
granted by media personnel and the elite, but are often resisted by the
general population. 1 In our view, the same underlying power sources that
own the media and fund them as advertisers, that serve as primary definers of the news, and that produce flak and proper-thinking experts, also,
playa key role in fixing basic principles and the dominant ideologies.
We believe that what journalists do, what they see as newsworthy, and
what they take for granted as premises of their work are frequently well
explained by the incentives, pressures, and constraints incorporated into
such a structural analysis.
These structural factors that dominate media operations are not alIcontrolling and do not always produce simple and homogeneous results.
It is well recognized, and may even be said to constitute a part of an institutional critique such as we present in this volume, that the various parts
of media organizations have some limited autonomy, that individual and
professional values influence media work, that policy is imperfectly enforced, and that media policy itself may allow some measure of dissent
and reporting that calls into question the accepted viewpoint. These considerations all work to assure some dissent and coverage of inconvenient
facts. 2 The beauty of the system, however, is that such dissent and inconvenient information are kept within bounds and at the margins, so that
while their presence shows that the system is not monolithic, they are
not large enough to interfere unduly with the domination of the official
agenda.
It should also be noted that we are talking about media structure and
performance, not the effects of the media on the public. Certainly, the
media's adherence to an official agenda with little dissent is likely to
influence public opinion in the desired direction, but this is a matter of
degree, and where the public's interests diverge sharply from that ofthe
elite, and where they have their own independent sources ofinformation,
the official line may be widely doubted. The point that we want to stress
here, however, is that the propaganda model describes forces that shape
what the media does; it does not imply that any propaganda emanating
from the media is always effective.
Although now more than a dozen years old, both the propaganda
model and the case studies presented with it in the first edition of this
book have held up remarkably welJ.3 The purpose of this new Introduction is to update the model, add some materials to supplement the case
studies already in place (and left intact in the chapters that follow), and
finally, to point out the possible applicability ofthe model to a number of
issues under current or recent debate.
Important branches of the media such as movies and books have had
substantial global markets for many years, but only in the past two
decades has a global media system come into being that is having major
effects on national media systems, culture, and politics.6 It has been
fueled by the globali2ation of business more generally, the associated
rapid growth of global advertising, and improved communications te<:hnology that has facilitated cross-border operations and control. It has
also been helped along by government policy :and the consolidation of
neoliberal ideology. The United States and other Western governments
have pressed the interests of their home-country firms eager to expand
abroad, and the Intern<ltional Monetary Fund (IMF) and World Bank
have done the same, striving with considerable success to enlarge transnational corpor<lte access to media markets across the globe. Neoliberal
ideology has provided the intellectual rationale for policies that have
opened up the ownership of broadcasting stations and cable and satellite
systems to private transnational investors.
The culture and ideology fostered in this globalization process relate
largely to "lifestyle" themes and goods and their acquisition; and they
tend to weaken any sense of community helpful to civic life. Robert
McChesney notes that "the hallmark of the global media system is its
relentless, ubiquitous commercialism. Shopping channels, infomercials, and product placement are booming in the global media system.
McChesney adds that it should come as no surprise that account after
account in the late 1990 documents the fascination, even the obsession,
of the world's middle class youth with consumer brands and products."8
The global media's "news" attenrion in recent years, aside from reporting
on crusades such as "Operation Allied Force" (the NATO war against
Yugoslavia) and on national elections, has been inordinately directed to
sensationalism, as in their obsessive focus on the O. ]. Simpson trial, the
Lewinsky scandal, and the deaths of two of the West's supercelebrities,
Princess Diana and John F. Kennedy, Jr.
The past few years have witnessed a rapid penetration of the Internet
by the leading newspapers and media conglomerates, all fearful of being
outflanked by small pioneer users of the new technology, and willing
(and able) to accept losses for years while testing out these new waters.
Anxious to reduce these losses, however, and with advertisers leery ofthe
value ofspending in a medium characterized by excessive audience control and rapid surfing, the large media entrants into the Internet have
gravitated to making familiar compromises-more attention to selling
goods, cutting back on news, and providing features immediately attractive to audiences and advertisers. The Boston Globe (a subsidiary of the
New 10Tk Times) and the washington Post are offering e-commerce goods
and services; and Ledbetter notes that "it's troubling that none of the
newspaper portals feels that quality journalism is at the center ofits strategy ... because journalism doesn't help you sell rhings."16 Former New
York Times editor Max Frankel says that the more newspapers pursue
Internet audiences, "the more will sex, sports, violence, and comedy
appear on their menus, slighting, if not altogether ignoring, the news of
foreign wars or welfare reform."
