The young man values metaphysical explanations, because they show him something highly significant in things which he found unpleasant or despicable, and if he is dissatisfied with himself, the feeling
becomes lighter when he recognises the innermost
world-puzzle or world-misery in that which he so
strongly disapproves of in himself. To feel himself less responsible and at the same time toHfind
things more interesting seems to him a
double benefit for which he has to thank metaphysics. Later on, certainly, he gets distrustful
of the whole metaphysical method of explanation ;
then perhaps it grows clear to him that those
results can be obtained equally well and more
scientifically in another w a y : that physical and
historical explanations produce the feeling of
personal relief to at least the same extent,
and that the interest in life and its problems is
perhaps still more aroused thereby.
When the history of the rise of thought comes
to be written, a new light will be thrown on the
following statement of a distinguished logician:—
“The primordial general law of the cognisant
subject consists in the inner necessity of recognising every object in itself in its own nature, as a
thing identical with itself, consequently self-exist-ing and at bottom remaining ever the same
and unchangeable: in short, in recognising everything as a substance/’ Even this law, which is
here called “ primordial,” has evolved : it will some
day be shown how gradually this tendency arises
in the lower organisms, how the feeble mole-eyes
of their organisations at first see only the same
thing,— how then, when the various awakenings
of pleasure and displeasure become noticeable,
various substances are gradually distinguished, but
each with one attribute, i.e. one single relation to
such an organism. The first step in logic is the
judgment,— the nature of which, according to the
decision of the best logicians, consists in belief.
A t the bottom of all belief lies the sensation of the
pleasant or the painful in relation to the sentient
subject. A new third sensation as the result of
two previous single sensations is the judgment
in its simplest form. We organic beings have
originally no interest in anything but its relation to
us in connection with pleasure and pain. Between
the moments (the states of feeling) when we become
conscious of this connection, lie moments of rest,
of non-feeling; the world and everything is then
without interest for us, we notice no change in it
(as even now a deeply interested person does not
notice when any one passes him). To the plant,
things are as a rule tranquil and eternal, everything like itself. From the period of the lower
organisms man has inherited the belief that
similar things exist (this theory is only contradicted by the matured experience of the most
advanced science).
