The Amazon rainforest (Portuguese: Floresta Amazônica or Amazônia; Spanish: Selva Amazónica, Amazonía or usually Amazonia; French: Forêt amazonienne; Dutch: Amazoneregenwoud), also known in English as Amazonia or the Amazon Jungle, is a moist broadleaf forest that covers most of the Amazon basin of South America. This basin encompasses 7,000,000 square kilometres (2,700,000 sq mi), of which 5,500,000 square kilometres (2,100,000 sq mi) are covered by the rainforest. This region includes territory belonging to nine nations. The majority of the forest is contained within Brazil, with 60% of the rainforest, followed by Peru with 13%, Colombia with 10%, and with minor amounts in Venezuela, Ecuador, Bolivia, Guyana, Suriname and French Guiana. States or departments in four nations contain "Amazonas" in their names. The Amazon represents over half of the planet's remaining rainforests, and comprises the largest and most biodiverse tract of tropical rainforest in the world, with an estimated 390 billion individual trees divided into 16,000 species.
Naturopathy appears to be an effective alternative for relief of specific menopausal symptoms compared to conventional therapy.
Routine data have the potential to support health technology assessment by RCTs. The cost of data collection and analysis is likely to fall, although further work is required to improve the validity of routine data, particularly in central returns. Better knowledge of the capability of local systems and access to the data held on them is also essential. Routinely captured clinical data have real potential to measure patient outcomes, particularly if the detail and precision of the data could be improved.
The results suggest that treatment of bladder dysfunction in boys with PUV can counteract the deterioration in renal function seen during childhood but the number of patients in our study is limited.
Regardless of gender or mechanism of injury, the thoracic spine (T2-T10) is the most common region of fracture in pediatric trauma patients.
Gender differences in MR imaging patterns of ACL tears exist: females are more commonly imaged in the acute stage and more commonly possess posterolateral tibial bone contusions; males have a more severe presentation than females, associated with more severe lateral femoral condyle and soft tissue injuries.
In spite of the limitations of the small sample size, the results seem to confirm an increase of direct health care costs in untreated depressed subjects. In view of the availability of efficient forms of treatment for depression, the findings obtained indicate that depression should be considered a priority question for public health and assigning of resources. Further confirmation should be sought in larger population-based studies representing the entire national context.
The low knowledge about mental disorders, particularly depression, confirms the importance and the need to increase mental health literacy. Furthermore, professionals must openly discuss illness models with their patients, especially emphasising the differences between illness and crisis.
Partial penetrance in RP11 could be due to the coinheritance of a PRPF31 gene defect and a low-expressed wild-type allele. This study revealed a potential avenue for future therapy in that it appears the moderate overexpression of wild-type PRPF31 may prevent clinical manifestation of the disease.
A sizable proportion of children with EHBA avoid significant chronic liver disease and its complications 10 years or more after conventional surgical correction and have an excellent quality of life. Their good outcome is not hampered by isolated episodes of ascending cholangitis. Whether or not the residual histologic damage will become symptomatic during their lifetime remains to be established.
In The Netherlands, when taking into account current refusal percentages, 320 to 360 organ donations and 5,800 tissue donations could be effectuated if organ donation is posed to all possible donors. For this, knowledge of medical criteria and contraindications for donation by the physicians and their willingness to discuss donation with next of kin must be improved.
We found no evidence to implicate any one drug regime preferentially in the development of PTLDs. The risk of developing PTLD seems to be a result of the whole transplantation process, which includes the antigenicity of the foreign graft, the immunosuppression resulting in inadequate cytotoxic T-cell activity, and the result of EBV infection. An important minority of cases are EBV negative.
Our results strongly suggest an inhibitory role for cortisol in the mechanism of male sexual response and behaviour. These properties are mediated rather via an effect on central structures than on the penile erectile tissue. Future studies to include patients suffering from erectile dysfunction may reveal whether or not there are differences in the cortisol serum profiles of healthy subjects and patients under different stages of sexual arousal.
Duration and pattern of breastfeeding were similar between children of adolescent mothers and of adult mothers. The complementary nutrition was similar, except for a lower intake of meat and a higher intake of eggs among the children of adolescent mothers.
The study showed that there is an important association between violence in the emotional relationships and the inconsistent use of condoms in the group studied. Therefore, preventive measures should be taken regarding youth behavior that involves the risk of STD/AIDS infection, associated with campaigns against violence.
Patients with schizophrenia consciously recollected emotional words better than neutral words.
A small group of politicians believed strongly that the fact that Saddam Hussien remained in power after the first Gulf War was a signal of weakness to the rest of the world, one that invited attacks and terrorism. Shortly after taking power with George Bush in 2000 and after the attack on 9/11, they were able to use the terrorist attacks to justify war with Iraq on this basis and exaggerated threats of the development of weapons of mass destruction. The military strength of the U.S. and the brutality of Saddam's regime led them to imagine that the military and political victory would be relatively easy.
Common Gateway Interface (CGI) is an important World Wide Web technology that enables a client web browser to request data from a program executed on the Web server. CGI specifies a standard for passing data between the client and the program.. . An aim of CGI is to be language-neutral, though Perl is often associated with it.
Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) is a group of symptoms related to the menstrual cycle. PMS is linked to changes in the endocrine system, which produces hormones that control the menstrual cycle. Medical experts don't fully understand the chain of events that causes premenstrual symptoms to be severe in some women and not in others. The one direct cause that is known to affect some women is genetic: Many women with PMS have a close family member with a history of PMS.
The Knights Templar were tasked with protecting Christian pilgrims following the First Crusade, but soon gained vast amounts of military and financial power.
